---
layout: post
title: Neural Nets, Extremism Research, and the Possibility of Better Moderation
---

For the last few months, I've been wondering if there's a relatively easy way to dramatically improve counter-extremism methods online. What if we were to combine the immense amount of specialized research being done in the social science community with the predictive power of neural networks? I fully acknowledge the fact that this smacks of technological determinism and utopianism--"let's throw the same algorithms that give rise to radicalization pathways at those pathways". 

However, I also sincerely believe that there's a pretty significant chasm right now between the work being done at tech companies on content moderation--both of the automated and manual sort--and the sophisticated research being done on extremism at academic institutions and thinktanks. What I can gather of the content moderation practices at Big Tech paints a picture of a severely mechanized process that inherently strips context and long-term historical understanding from the content being moderated. How can we possibly hope to push back against the extremism en masse that social media enables if we cannot build deep, nuanced understanding of the extremism at play? How can we expect automated systems to learn if we do not do the same? 

My research has uncovered a bit of work being done on similar ideas. Google's Jigsaw thinktank, which is mandated with creating innovative technologies specifically to fight back against terrorism. Jigsaw has done terrific work, including releasing the API dubbed Perspective, which is designed to help outlets filter out toxic comments and improve the quality of online discourse.

And yet, social media is still rife with threatening language. One of the reasons is certainly because of the strong dedication to freedom of expression that these companies take. This makes the companies especially risk averse to false positives, which would induce anger among commenters and distrust of policy enforcement. But this risk aversion can also be gamed, as seen when right-wing communities wage campaigns to discredit good-faith efforts to police radicalization language and imagery. There is a need for understanding memetic language and edge-case rhetoric that normal rules-based content moderation cannot sufficiently handle. 

I think that this isn't beyond the capabilities of a well-trained algorithm, but that algorithm is only as good as the data that is fed into it. We have already seen that deep learning as a technique is plagued by unrealistic expectations of its power in a vacuum. I think that deep learning for counter-radicalization is best conceptualized as a system of three entities: the classification or risk-scoring model; the data scientist who trains, creates, and modifies the model, and the researcher who creates the data to feed into the model. Training data needs to evolve as threats evolve, and so its creation needs to be considered just as important as the creation of the model itself. If extremist experts can be embedded in the overall process as a vital component of it, then we may be able to achieve more nuance, more flexibility, and greater success in the fight against extremism.

In this blog, I will describe my process as I work toward building such a framework. I will initially use the fastai library, which is built on top of Pytorch, to build my text classification model. Fastai's out-of-the-box functions create an AWD-LSTM recurrent neural network based on a pre-trained model following ULMFiT's work on transfer learning for NLP. From there, I will see if I can get better results by diving into Pytorch and setting up different architectures, such as a transformer model like Google's BERT.
